Node repurpose tool docs (#40525)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/commands/node-tool.asciidoc

== elasticsearch-node

The `elasticsearch-node` command enables you to perform unsafe operations that
risk data loss but which may help to recover some data in a disaster and

> repurpose nodes into new roles.

Reviewer: Suggest breaking into two simpler sentences:

```
The `elasticsearch-node` command enables you to perform certain unsafe
operations on a node that are only possible while it is shut down. This command
allows you to adjust the <<modules-node,role>> of a node and may be able to
recover some data after a disaster.
```

Which reminds me, the docs about roles are at `docs/reference/modules/node.asciidoc` and I think we should have docs there to say that you now have to take special steps to change the role of a node.

[float]
=== Synopsis

[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------

> bin/elasticsearch-node unsafe-bootstrap|detach-cluster|repurpose

Reviewer: I'm inclined to put the `repurpose` command first here (and elsewhere) because of the three commands it's the one that we hope is the most used.

`elasticsearch-node` tool to construct a new cluster that contains some of the
data from the failed cluster.

> If a node that previously held data or were master-eligible is repurposed into

Reviewer: I suggest:

1. moving this to the top of the `Description` section,
2. making new subheadings e.g. `==== Changing the roles of a node` and `==== Recovering data after a disaster` to separate the sections more clearly, and
3. expanding this paragraph into a longer description of the concepts (and/or describing the concepts in `docs/reference/modules/node.asciidoc` and linking to them).

Author: About item 3: I think master-eligible node and data node are already described in `docs/reference/modules/node.asciidoc`. I can certainly link to those descriptions. But it sounds like you wanted something more than that, can you elaborate on that?

Reviewer: Sure, sorry, I'll clarify. Today the `Node` docs describe the `node.data` and `node.master` settings but do not say anything about how to go about changing them. This makes sense in 6.x because you don't have to do anything particularly special to change them, but in 7.0 this is no longer the case. I think that page needs to mention that you should only really set these settings before starting a node for the first time, and also talk about (or at least link to) the extra steps you need to do if you want to change them later.

being an either no-master or no-data node, cleanup of data (e.g. shard data) that
is no longer needed on the node is necessary to avoid future problems. The
`elasticsearch-node` tool should be used to do such cleanup.

This tool has three modes:

* `elasticsearch-node unsafe-bootstap` can be used if there is at least one
  remaining master-eligible node. It forces one of the remaining nodes to form
  a brand-new cluster on its own, using its local copy of the cluster metadata.
  This is known as _unsafe cluster bootstrapping_.

> * `elasticsearch-node detach-cluster` enables you to move nodes from one cluster

Reviewer: D'oh :)

  to another. This can be used to move nodes into the new cluster created with
  the `elastisearch-node unsafe-bootstap` command. If unsafe cluster bootstrapping was not
  possible, it also enables you to
  move nodes into a brand-new cluster.

> * `elasticsearch-node repurpose` reports on and performs necessary index meta-data

Reviewer: I'd put this mode first.

that there has been no data loss, it just means that tool was able to complete
its job.

> [[node-tool-repurpose]]

Reviewer: I'd put this section above the other two.

[float]
==== Repurposing nodes

> A master-eligible and data carrying node holds on-disk index data:

Reviewer: I think I'd prefer to try and split this whole section into two parallel descriptions about `node.data` and `node.master` respectively, because here it's a bit unclear what this says about a master-ineligible data node or (conversely) a dedicated master node. It might be a little repetitive, but I'm ok with that.

`detach-cluster`:: Specifies to unsafely detach this node from its cluster so
it can join a different cluster.

> `repurpose`:: Report on and cleanup excess persisted data.

Reviewer: I'd put this first.

[float]
=== Examples

[float]

> ==== Repurposing node as master, no-data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Repurposing a data node as a dedicated master node
```

> In this example, a node that previously held data is repurposed as master, no-data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, a node that previously held data is repurposed as a dedicated master node.
```

> First update the node settings to `node.master=true` and `node.data=false`. Then run the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First update the node's settings to `node.master: true` and `node.data: false` in its `elasticsearch.yml` config file. Then run the
```

`elasticsearch-node repurpose` command to check for and remove excess shard data:

[source,txt]
----
node$ ./bin/elasticsearch-node repurpose

    WARNING: Elasticsearch MUST be stopped before running this tool.

Found 2 shards in 2 indices to clean up
Use -v to see list of paths and indices affected
Node is being re-purposed as master and no-data. Clean-up of shard data will be performed.
Do you want to proceed?
Confirm [y/N] y
Node successfully repurposed to master and no-data.
----

[float]

> ==== Repurposing node as no-master, no-data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Repurposing a data node as a coordinating-only node
```

> In this example, a node that previously held data is repurposed as no-master, no-data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, a node that previously held data is repurposed as a coordinating-only node.
```

> First update the node settings to `node.master=true` and `node.data=false`. Then run the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First update the node's settings to `node.master: false` and `node.data: false` in its `elasticsearch.yml` config file. Then run the
```

Node was successfully detached from the cluster
----

[float]

> ==== Repurposing node as master, no-data

Reviewer: I'd put this first.
